CHAPTER XII.
And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying, This month shall
be unto you the beginning of months, it shall be the first month of the year to you.
Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they
shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for
an house.
And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto
his house take it according to the number of the souls, every man according to his eating
shall make your account for the lamb.
Your lamb shall be without blemish a male of the first year, ye shall take it out from
the sheep or from the goats, and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the
same month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the
evening.
And they shall take up the blood and strike it on the two side-posts and on the upper
door-post of the houses wherein they shall eat it.
And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire and unleavened bread, and
with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
Eat not of it raw nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire, his head with his legs
and with the pertenance thereof.
And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning, and that which remaineth of it
until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
And thus shall ye eat it, with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your
staff in your hand, and ye shall eat it in haste, it is the Lord's Passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first born
in the land of Egypt, both man and beast, and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute
judgment.
I am the Lord.
And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are, and when I see
the blood I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you when
I smite the land of Egypt.
And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout
your generations, ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread, even the first day ye shall put away leaven
out of your houses, for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh
day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there
shall be an holy convocation to you.
No matter of work shall be done in them save that which every man must eat, that only may
be done of you.
And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread, for in this selfsame day have I brought
your armies out of the land of Egypt, therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations
by an ordinance for ever.
In the first month on the fourteenth day of the month at even ye shall eat unleavened
bread until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses, for whosoever eateth that
which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether
he be a stranger or born in the land.
Ye shall eat nothing leavened, and all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.
Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel and said unto them, Draw out and take you
a lamb according to your families and kill the Passover.
And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop and dip it in the blood that is in the basin and strike
the lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin, and none of you
shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians, and when he seeth the blood upon
the lintel and on the two side-posts the Lord will pass over the door and will not suffer
the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.
And it shall come to pass when ye become to the land which the Lord will give you according
as he hath promised that ye shall keep this service.
And it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service,
that ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover who passed over the houses
of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses.
And the people bowed the head and worshipped.
And the children of Israel went away and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron,
so did they.
And it came to pass that at midnight the Lord smote all the first born in the land of Egypt
from the first born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne under the first born of the captive
that was in the dungeon and all the first born of cattle.
And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants and all the Egyptians, and there
was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
And he called for Moses and Aaron by night and said, Rise up and get you forth from among
my people, both ye and the children of Israel, and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said.
Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone, and bless me also.
And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people that they might send them out of the land
in haste, for they said, We be all dead men.
And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading troughs being
bound up and their clothes upon their shoulders. And the children of Israel did according to
the word of Moses, and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver and jewels of gold
and raiment. And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that
they lent unto them such things as they required, and they spoiled the Egyptians.
And the children of Israel journeyed from Ramesses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand
on foot that were men, beside children. And a mixed multitude went up also with them,
and flocks and herds, even very much cattle. And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough
which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because they were thrust
out of Egypt and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.
Now the sojourning of the children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and thirty
years. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame
day had came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt.
It is a night to be much observed unto the Lord for bringing them out from the land of
Egypt. This is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in
their generations.
And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the Passover. There shall
no stranger eat thereof, but every man's servant that has bought for money, when thou hast
circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof. A foreigner and an hired servant shall not
eat thereof. In one house shall it be eaten, thou shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh
abroad out of the house, neither shall ye break a bone thereof. All the congregation
of Israel shall keep it. And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
Passover to the Lord, let all his meals be circumcised, and then let him come near and
keep it, and he shall be as one that is born in the land, for no uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof. One law shall be to him that is home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth
among you.
Thus did all the children of Israel, as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass the selfsame day that the Lord did bring the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt by their armies.
CHAPTER XIII
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Sanctify unto me all the first born, whatsoever openeth
the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast, it is mine. And Moses
said unto the people, Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt out of the house
of bondage, for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this place, there shall
no leavened bread be eaten.
This day came ye out in the month Abib.
And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and
the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he swear unto thy
fathers to give thee a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service
in this month.
Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to
the Lord.
Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days, and there shall no leavened bread be seen
with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.
And thou shalt show thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord
did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.
And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine
eyes, that the Lord's law may be in thy mouth, for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought
thee out of Egypt.
Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.
And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he
shalt set apart unto the Lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh
of a beast which thou hast, the males shall be the Lord's.
And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb, and if thou wilt not redeem it,
then thou shalt break his neck, and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt
thou redeem.
And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this?
that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt from
the house of bondage.
And it came to pass when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the firstborn
in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the firstborn of beast.
Therefore I sacrificed to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, being males, but all the
firstborn of my children I redeem.
And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for
by strength of hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.
And it came to pass when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the
way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near, for God said, Lest per adventure
the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt.
But God led the people about through the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea, and the
children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had straightly sworn the children of
Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones away hence
with you.
And they took their journey from Succoth and encamped in ethom in the edge of the wilderness.
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way, and
by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, to go by day and night.
He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from
before the people.
CHAPTER XIV
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel that they turn
and encamp forphi-hyrath between Migdal and the sea over against Baal-Ziphon.
Before it shall ye encamp by the sea.
For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness
hath shut them in.
And I will harden Pharaoh's heart that he shall follow after them, and I will be honored
upon Pharaoh and upon all his host that the Egyptians may know that I am the Lord.
And they did so.
And it was told the King of Egypt that the people fled, and the heart of Pharaoh and
of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that
we have let Israel go from serving us?
And he made ready his chariot and took his people with him, and he took six hundred chosen
chariots and all the chariots of Egypt and captains over every one of them.
And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and he pursued after the children
of Israel, and the children of Israel went out with a high hand.
But the Egyptians pursued after them all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh and his horsemen
and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea beside Piah-hyrath before Baal-Ziphon.
And when Pharaoh drew nigh the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold the
Egyptians marched after them, and they were sore afraid, and the children of Israel cried
out unto the Lord.
And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away
to die in the wilderness?
Wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us to carry us forth out of Egypt?
Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone that we may
for it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians than that we should die in the wilderness?
And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the
Lord which he will show to you to-day, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to-day ye
shall see them again no more for ever.
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto me, Speak unto the children of
Israel that they go forward, but lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over
the sea, and divide it, and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the
midst of the sea.
And I, behold I, will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them,
and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and
upon his horsemen.
And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh,
upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
And the angel of God which went before the camp of Israel removed and went behind them,
and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face and stood behind them.
And it came between the cap of the Egyptians and the cap of Israel, and it was a cloud
in darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these, so that the one came not near
the other all the night.
And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the Lord caused the sea to go back
by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were
divided.
And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground, and the waters
were a wall unto them on their right hand and on their left.
And the Egyptians pursued and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh's
horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
And it came to pass that in the morning watch the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians
through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians, and
took off their chariot wheels that they draved them heavily, so that the Egyptians said,
Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may
come again upon the Egyptians, and upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength
when the morning appeared, and the Egyptians fled against it, and the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
And the waters returned and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh
that came into the sea after them, there remained not so much as one of them.
But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea, and the waters
were a wall unto them on their right hand and on their left.
Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw
the Egyptians dead upon the seashore.
And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians, and the people feared
the Lord and believed the Lord and His servant Moses.
CHAPTER XV
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spake, saying,
I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously.
The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
The Lord is my strength and song, and he has become my salvation.
He is my God, and I will prepare him and habitation, my Father's God, and I will exalt him.
The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea.
His chosen captains also are drowned in the Red Sea.
The depths have covered them.
They sank into the bottom as a stone.
Thy right hand, O Lord, has become glorious in power.
Thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against
thee.
Thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.
And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright
as a heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be
satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods?
Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Thou stretchest out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed, thou hast guided
them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.
The people shall hear and be afraid, sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestine.
Then the Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, the mighty men of Moab trembling shall take hold
upon them, all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still
as a stone, till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over which thou hast
purchased.
Thou shalt bring them in and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the
place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the sanctuary, O Lord, which
thy hands have established.
The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.
For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the
Lord brought again the waters of the sea upon them, but the children of Israel went on dry
land in the midst of the sea.
And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women
went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously, the horse
and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
So Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur,
and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were
bitter, therefore the name of it was called Marah.
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
And he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree, which, when he had cast into the
waters, the waters were made sweet.
There he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them, and said, If thou
wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right
in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none
of these diseases upon thee which I have brought upon the Egyptians, for I am the Lord that
healeth thee.
And they came to Elam, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm-trees,
and they encamped there by the waters.
CHAPTER XVI.
And they took their journey from Elam, and all the congregation of the children of Israel
came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elam and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron
in the wilderness, and the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by
the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt when we sat by the flesh-pots and when we
did eat bread to the full, for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this
whole assembly with hunger.
Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you, and the people
shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them whether they will
walk in my law or no.
And it shall come to pass that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring
in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that
the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt, and in the morning then ye shall
see the glory of the Lord, for that he heareth your murmurings against the Lord, and what
are we that ye murmur against us?
And Moses said, This shall be when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full, for that the Lord heareth your murmurings which
ye murmur against him, and what are we, your murmurings are not against us, but against
the Lord.
And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come
near before the Lord, for he hath heard your murmurings.
And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel,
that they looked toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in
the cloud.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel,
speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be
filled with bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.
And it came to pass that at even the quails came up and covered the camp, and in the morning
the dew lay round about the host.
And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay
a small round thing, as small as the whore-frost on the ground.
And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is manna, for they
whisked not what it was.
And Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.
This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded.
Gather of it every man according to his eating, and omer for every man according to the number
of your persons.
Take ye every man for them which are in his tents.
And the children of Israel did so, and gathered some more, some less.
And when they did meet it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he
that gathered little had no lack.
They gathered every man according to his eating.
And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses, but some of them left of it until the morning,
and it bred worms and stank, and Moses was wroth with them.
And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating, and when the
sun waxed hot it melted.
And it came to pass that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers
for one man, and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
And he said unto them, This is that which the Lord hath said, To-morrow is the rest
of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord.
Bake that which ye will bake to-day, and seed that which ye will seed, and that which remaineth
over, lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bad, and it did not stink, neither was there
any worm therein.
And Moses said, Eat that to-day, for to-day is a Sabbath unto the Lord, to-day ye shall
not find it in the field.
Six days shall ye gather it, but on the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, in it there shall
be none.
And it came to pass that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather,
and they found none.
And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?
See for that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day
the bread of two days, Abigee, every man in his place, let no man go out of his place
on the seventh day.
So the people rested on the seventh day.
And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna, and it was like coriander seed, white,
and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commandeth, fill an omer of it to be
kept for your generations, that they may seed the bread wherewith I have fed you in the
wilderness when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot and put an omer full of Manna therein, and lay
it up before the Lord to be kept for your generations.
As the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the testimony to be kept.
And the children of Israel did eat Manna forty years until they came to a land inhabited.
They did eat Manna until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
Now an omer is the tenth part of an ifah.